feat(optimization): support phase_shift in LOPF incl. optimisable taps (#1661)
PyPSA/PyPSA: docs/release-notes.md

# Release Notes

!!! info "Upcoming Release"

    The features listed below have not yet been released, but will be included in the
    next update! If you would like to use these features in the meantime, you will need
    to install the `master` branch, e.g. `pip install git+https://github.com/pypsa/pypsa`.

### Features

> - Phase-shifting transformers (PSTs, also known as _dwarsregeltransformatoren_) are now fully supported in linear optimal power flow. Setting `phase_shift_min < phase_shift_max` on a `Transformer` turns the voltage phase-angle shift into a per-snapshot decision variable bounded by those two attributes (degrees); the optimiser re-taps the PST each snapshot to redistribute flow around cycles, modelling TSO operational tap control. The optimised per-snapshot angle is written to the dynamic output `n.transformers_t["phase_shift"]`, mirroring the `p_set`/`p` input/output split. (<!-- md:pr 1661 -->)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Phase-shifting transformers (PSTs) are now supported in linear optimal power flow. Setting `phase_shift_min < phase_shift_max` on a `Transformer` turns the voltage phase-angle shift into a per-snapshot decision variable bounded by those two attributes (degrees); the optimiser re-taps the PST each snapshot to redistribute flow around cycles, modelling TSO operational tap control. The optimised per-snapshot angle is written to the dynamic output `n.transformers_t["phase_shift_opt"]`, mirroring the `p_set`/`p` input/output split. (<!-- md:pr 1661 -->)
```

No Dutch please ;)

### Breaking Changes

- The `Transformer` input attribute `phase_shift` has been renamed to `phase_shift_set`. The name `phase_shift` is now a dynamic *output* holding the realised/optimised per-snapshot shift (analogous to `p_set`/`p`). Setting `phase_shift` via `n.add(...)` or loading networks saved with the old attribute still works but emits a `DeprecationWarning` and is aliased to `phase_shift_set`; this fallback will be removed in 2.0. (<!-- md:pr 1661 -->)

### Bug Fixes

> - The fixed `phase_shift_set` on `Transformer` components is now included in the cycle-based Kirchhoff Voltage Law constraint in `n.optimize()`. Previously the phase shift was silently dropped in LOPF (only `n.lpf()` and `n.pf()` respected it), causing optimisation results to diverge from subsequent non-linear power-flow verification. (<!-- md:pr 1661 -->)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The fixed `phase_shift_set` on `Transformer` components is now included in the cycle-based Kirchhoff Voltage Law constraint in `n.optimize()`. Previously the phase shift was not considered in LOPF (only `n.lpf()` and `n.pf()` respected it), causing optimisation results to diverge from subsequent non-linear power-flow verification. (<!-- md:pr 1661 -->)
```

- Phase-shifting transformers (PSTs) are now supported in linear optimal power flow. Setting `phase_shift_min < phase_shift_max` on a `Transformer` turns the voltage phase-angle shift into a per-snapshot decision variable bounded by those two attributes (degrees); the optimiser re-taps the PST each snapshot to redistribute flow around cycles, modelling TSO operational tap control. The optimised per-snapshot angle is written to the dynamic output `n.transformers_t["phase_shift"]`, mirroring the `p_set`/`p` input/output split. (<!-- md:pr 1661 -->)

### Enhancements

- Speed up [`create_model()`][pypsa.optimization.OptimizationAccessor.create_model] for large networks by computing the bus membership filter in `define_nodal_balance_constraints` with a pandas hash join instead of `xarray.isin` over object-dtype arrays. (<!-- md:pr 1770 -->)

### Breaking Changes

> - The `Transformer` input attribute `phase_shift` has been renamed to `phase_shift_set`. The name `phase_shift` is now a dynamic *output* holding the realised/optimised per-snapshot shift (analogous to `p_set`/`p`). Setting `phase_shift` via `n.add(...)` or loading networks saved with the old attribute still works but emits a `DeprecationWarning` and is aliased to `phase_shift_set`; this fallback will be removed in 2.0. (<!-- md:pr 1661 -->)

Reviewer 2: Even with the deprecation helpers, this will still break if a user is reading or writing to  `n.transformers["phase_shift"]`. We don't do breaking changes before major releases

This can be mitigated by avoiding the naming collision:
Now `v1.3`:
- `phase_shift` stays as is, static input
- Introduce `phase_shift_min`, `phase_shift_max` with new functionality
- Introduce `phase_shift_<something>` for dynamic output (the new/old `phase_shift` in here)

`v2.0`:
- rename `phase_shift` to `phase_shift_set`
- potentially also rename `phase_shift_<something>` to `phase_shift`

Reviewer 3: I guess we are in a grey zone. from a data flow perspective things are not breaking 

`n.transformers["phase_shift"]` is so far only used in the pf module and still works as is (with the deprecation).  the time series was never used and is still not used here. 

the optimization module only reads from the new `phase_shift_set` (static+dynamic) and only overwrites the dynamic `phase_shift` which is not used in any previous release. 

The only thing breaking is that the attributing setting anymore: `n.transformers["phase_shift"] = ...` ; Fabian pre-2024 would say "nobody does that, so don't mind" but I understand if that is already breaking enough...

Reviewer 2: If you guys vouch for nobody is noticing it, I am fine with breaking this. We just can't sell stability which everyone is telling us is the most important thing, more important than any new features, and then squeeze in a couple of hope nobody is using it breaking things from time to time.

And I also don't see much on the downside, the workflow above with `phase_shift_opt` until 2.0 is fine, and then you get a clean communicated list of attribute renames. The `_opt` suffix syntax is also used across other attributes. Why rename and break now, while it's not even bringing consistency? I would rather argue to find all of those inconsistencies/ cleaner names and apply them up all at once with `2.0`

Reviewer 3: This is why we are in 2026 now :) Let's do it as you suggested.
